# Introduction to Web Dev

## CSS

Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), created by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), is a style sheet language used for defining and managing the appearance and formatting of a HTML document. Called cascading because changes made to a stylesheet will automatically cascade to all corresponding HTML content when it is reloaded in a browser. Like HTML it is not case-sensitive. A rule set is a collection of CSS rules, defined by a selector (a class or identifier for example) and curly braces {...}. For selectors a # denotes an id value, . is for a class and nothing precedes the name of an element. A CSS property or attribute is the component of the element being styled and the CSS value applied to that property. Comments in CSS are defined via /* */.

A **style sheet** just refers to a set of CSS style rules and is not necessarily a separate file. Inline styles are applied directly to the style attribute of a HTML element. An internal style sheet is a set of rules added to the HTML *head* element. An external style sheet is a set of rules residing in a separate .css file and applied via a style link attribute to the HTML page. Inline styles take precedence over internal or external style sheets. The downside to inline styles is that they can't be applied to multiple elements and they also can't be applied to pseudo-elements/psuedo-classes. These are used for single element specific styling. Internal stylesheets are page specific can also increase loading times due to the increased size of the page. These are used for multiple elements across the same page. When selecting elements a space, rather than a comma, denotes the later selector is nested within the former. Pre-existing published stylesheets can be linked to within a project using *@import* which requires the absolute path.

Be aware of **precedence**; first style rules in external stylesheets are applied in the order that they appeared in the <head> element, then rules in the internal style sheet again in the order that they appear, and finally inline styles. So styles can be overwritten due to this ordering.

**Colours** can be applied through named colours, RGBA values or Hexadecimal values. For RGBA values, rbg(0, 0, 0, 0), the first three values are 0 to 255 and the fourth is alpha channel defining the opacity of the colour. Alpha is between 0 and 1. Using hexadecimal values the colour is expressed as three two digit hex numbers. When these three numbers are identical only the first hex number needs to be defined.

**Images** can be applied to certain attributes/properties. For example *background-image:url("image-address.png")*. A *background-repeat* property can be set to define if a background image repeats and if so, how. Another property (*background-attachment*) defines if the image is anchored or moves when scrolled. All can be denoted in shorthand under the *background* attribute.

**Size** can be denoted in absolute or relative unites. *em* and *en* are relative values that refer to the default width of the letter M and N respectively. 1em is the default size of the given font. 1.5em is 150% larger. It's widely used in modern web design to scale text correctly with different screen sizes

**Font Families** are generic categories to which a font belongs, synonymous with typeface. The generic categories work across most browsers, difference browsers may choose a different font for each class. A specific font can be applied to the *font-family* attribute for greater consistency. Although browsers depend on the fonts available on the user's OS and if the specified font isn't available then the browser selects the one it believes to be the best replacement. To improve upon this list of fonts, a font stack, can be supplied. The location for the required font files can also be supplied. These files can be hosted on your own server or an external server. Hosting on your own server can violate distribution constraints upon the font's license though.

**Pseudo-classes** can be used to apply a CSS rule set to a particular start of an element. Used in the format *selector:pseudo-class {...}*. These are especially useful for link states or button states. The *nth-child()* pseudo-class can be used for example to style alternating table rows differently using *tbody tr:nth-child(even)* and *tbody tr:nth-child(odd)*. Pseudo-classes can only be used in internal and external stylesheets, not inline. 

**Box-Sizing** refers to the box model used in HTML/CSS or content dimensions combined with padding and margin. A *border-box* value mean that padding and margin resizes the inner content rather than expanding the overall box. *Content-box* is the reverse. There are methods to reset *box-sizing* to *content-box* - see: https://css-tricks.com/box-sizing/.

*Float* can be used to change **content layout**, this positions a content block against the left or right margin and the content block below moves up to fill the remaining space between the block and the non-floated-to margin. Using an empty *div* float can be turned off from the location of that div. An empty *div* is a common trick when applying style to a specific point on a page, without having the associate that style to content. Paragraph content can easily wrap around images but tables and lists have a more rigid structure. They need to be wrapped within a block.

**Bootstrap** is a web framework built using jQuery.js and popper.js, used for rapid development of responsive websites. It follows a mobile-first paradigm to ensure that content scales effectively from small mobile screens to larger desktop monitors. Bootstrap can be incorporated via minified CSS and JS files; minified denotes that only the required characters are contained and not unnecessary indents and whitespace often added to improve code readability. Alternatively, the required files can be provided through linking to a Content Delivery Network (CDN). The advantage is always using the most recent Bootstrap edition of that version and you don't need to use storage space on your website, the downside is that it can take slightly longer to load remote files, it's harder to customise and your website is now dependant on the host CDN.

**Meta elements** are used to provide information about the contents of the web page, for example the character set used by the page. For Bootstrap two meta elements are needed; a charset meta element to ensure the browser correctly displays the Bootstrap fonts, and a viewport meta element to instruct the browser to use the size of the user's window to determine how to apply Bootstrap's media queries. When linking to Bootstrap, place custom stylesheet links below the Bootstrap link to ensure they take precedence. jQuery.js and popper.js must be loaded before the Bootstrap.js. The JavaScript files can be added to the *head* element but to decrease loading times for the HTML content they are often linked to just before the closing *body* tag.

**Responsible design** refers to designing inclusively for the entire audience and all of their use cases. For example, not just favoured browsers but designed for all of them. *Responsive Design* is the approach to web design that focuses on optimally displaying a site across all devices.

Bootstrap's **Grid system** is a 12-column grid system using a flexbox that assists in automatically resizing some components. Content must be within a *div* with some container class. The span of columns can be explicitly defined otherwise the available space is equally divided by the undefined columns. The grid can be styled in different formed based on the size of the device; *sm*, *md*, and *lg*. Remember the class attribute can contain multiple class values spaced with whitespace. Responsive tables are supported which will become scrollable if they extend beyond the available view. Shorthand can be used to refer to styles, for example *mt-5* as a class refers to a style of margin-top set to 3 * $spacer (Sass variable)

CSS *Media Queries* are used to apply styles based upon certain conditions, for example; viewport height/width, orientation, and type (screen, speech, print, and all). Within CSS these are defined via *@media type and (property:value) { selector {...} }*.
